-*-text-*-

This file is intended to contain information for those interested in
working on the guile bits of GnuCash.

I've recently added some GUI functions callable from scheme.  This is
generally pretty straightforward, and you can look in the code to see
how I did it, but there are a few bits you have to be careful about.

One of the main sources of useful information is "info guile-ref".
This contains the documentation for all the guile C-side functions
like SCM_CAR(), scm_append(), etc. that manipulate opaque SCM objects
from the guile side.

Given that and a reasonable understanding of GTK/GNOME, you should be
able to follow what I've done.

Introduction To Scheme and guile(rgmerk)
--------------------------------
Please skip this if you already know what Scheme is and why it's
so cool . . . 

Scheme is a dialect of LISP (List Programming), one of the earliest
programming languages.  It makes so many things easy it's just not
funny.  It can be a little confusing for people raised on C and Java, 
but any time taken to learn it is made up for with easier-to-write,
easier-to-debug, more reusable,  and more robust code.

Guile is an implementation of standard Scheme which is easily
embeddable in C, making multi-language development relatively
straightforward.  You can easily access data and procedures from
either end.  Guile supports a superset of R4RS (the Scheme standard).  
For initial experimentation, you can  use Guile as an interactive Scheme 
shell to play around with the system.  

SLIB is a a library for Scheme implementations (including guile)
that implements a large collection of useful data structures
and algorithms.

FIXME: Starting gnucash as a guile shell. .. 

While the Guile documentation (in info format) explains
Guile specifics, it doesn't have much information about Scheme,
the language.  The Internet Scheme Repository:

http://www.cs.indiana.edu/scheme-repository/home.html

has quite a useful collection of information, including 
FAQs, online copies of the Scheme standard (which is actually
quite readable and useful), and pointers to web tutorials
and other resources.   

g-wrap
------

Note: gwrap has been replaced by swig and dropped completely in
SVN-trunk on 2006-10-20 and for gnucash-2.2.0.

(Old info: g-wrap is the tool used to automate the wrapping of C
functions to make them callable from the guile code.  g-wrap is
now maintained by Rob Browning and is available from
ftp://ftp.gnucash.org/pub/g-wrap )


Garbage collection:
-------------------

One issue to keep in mind is that of garbage collection.  You cannot
pass a scheme side item to the C side (through a SCM) and then store
that object off somewhere on the C side such that it lives longer than
all of it's guile side references.  If you do, you're likely to get a
crash.  The problem is that guile's garbage collector only knows to
save guile items that still have guile side pointers, or that are
found somewhere on the current C side stack.  If you store a SCM item
off in a C data structure (say a callback pointer), and then return to
the guile side and drop the guile-side reference to the item, guile
may garbage collect it before it's used by the C side.

For example, this psudeo-code is a problem:

  void gnc_some_function(SCM scm_thunk) {
    gnc_set_push_button_callback(some_button, scm_thunk);
  }

  (define (unsafe-guile-function)
    (let ((my-callback (lambda () (display "Hello\n"))))
      (gnc:some-function my-callback)))

The problem here is that if you call unsafe-guile-function, it
registers the pointer to the anonymous lambda created in the let
construct with the button on the C-side and then returns.  As soon as
it returns, guile has no more references to the anonymous lambda, and
it's not on the C stack, so guile thinks it's OK to garbage collect
the function even though the C side has a pointer to it and may still
use it.

The moral of this story is that if you need to have the C side ferret
away a scheme item for later, you must also keep at least one
reference to that item on the guile side until the C side is finished
with it.  I believe that the guile people have recently come up with a
nice general solution to this problem, but until that's generally
available, there are a number of ways you can solve this.

If nothing else, you can just create a global hash on the guile side,
place the object in question in the hash table, and then have the
C-side delete that item from the hash when it's finished with it.


Guile Interrupts:
-----------------

Another issue that I'm not quite sure of myself yet is that of
interrupts.  Guile has the ability to protect certain segments of code
with SCM_DEFER_INTS/SCM_ALLOW_INTS, but at the moment I'm not sure
when this is required.  If anyone gets the chance to check this out
before I do, then please edit this file and put your findings here.
