/** \page financeconstraints Financial Constraints in GnuCash

				Linas Vepstas <linas@linas.org>
                        September 2003
 

\section financeoverview Overview:

The GnuCash Engine implements a set of financial constraints so
that a set of basic/core accounting rules are obeyed.  The best
known example is the "double-entry" constraint: the total value
of a transaction must always be zero.  A more mundane example
is that cap gains are recorded on the date that they occur: or,
more plainly: the posted date on the transaction that records
cap gains is the same as the posted date of the transaction that
caused the gains.  At this time, these constraints are 
implemented in an ad-hoc manner.  The goal of this document is
to list and document as many of these constraints as possible,
and to review the framework in which they operate.  A possible
future direction is to formalize the framework, so that it becomes
easier to add and work with new types of constraints.


\section financeintro Introduction:

There are three very different classes of constraints within GnuCash,
which should not be confused with each other. They work in very
different ways and have very different goals.  First, there are
the "GUI Constraints", which are implemented as events: they make
sure that the the GUI displays the data in the engine as it currently
stands.  Next are the "Multi-User Constraints", which are implemented
in the Postgres SQL backend: They make sure that as one user alters
data, that it is reflected in what the other users see.  Finally,
there are the "Financial Constraints", implemented in the engine,
that make sure that the financial data recorded in the engine meets 
a set of core and extended accounting rules.  This document deals 
primarily with this third class.

Note that some financial constraints are so core, so key to GnuCash 
that they are woven into the object design itself.  For example, the 
posted date is a part of the transaction: different splits cannot 
possibly have different posted dates, as there is no mechanism to 
represent this.  All splits get their posted date from their parent 
transaction.

The constraints that we are most interested in are the ones that 
are implemented as 'triggers' or 'scrubbers':  these are not reflected
in the core structure, but are rather implemented as routines that
run at specific times and alter the data to be self-consistent in 
certain ways.   The 'double-entry' constraint belongs to this class:
it computes the total value of all the splits in a transaction, and 
adds one, if needed, to bring the total to zero.  This constraint
runs when the transaction is committed.   Although this is an important
constraint, there is no (easy) way to reflect it directly in the
object design; thus, it acts as a rule that must be periodically
imposed.

At this time, the financial constraints within gnucash are impelmented
in an ad-hoc manner, with no governing framework.  This may change,
as there is pressure to support more complex constraints that vary
by region/country, by account type, by industry, etc.

\section financelazy Why Not 'Lazy Evaluation'?

Lazy evaluation is superficially like constraints, but differs in an
important way.  With lazy evaluation, when something changes (e.g.
the posted date) it is marked dirty. Later, when something else needs
something (e.g. the posted date on a gains split), the dirty flag
is examined, and, if dirty, the new/corrected value is computed and 
returned.

Simple/ad-hoc lazy evaluation works well when data dependencies are 
simple, but it breaks down when there are too many/circular
relationships.  It becomes all too easy to get trapped in infinite
loops of corrections.   The goal of moving to a formal constraint
system is to introduce specific, well-defined sync points where 
constraint checking can be done, without incuring circular
deopendencies.  At this time, the sync point is the xaccTransCommitEdit()
subroutine.

\section financelist List of Constraints

The following is a list of the constraints that are currently
implemented in the GnuCash Engine, with a short description of what
they are, and how they work.

- Double Entry
- Double-Balance
- Date Posted of Gains Transaction
   The posted date of the gains transaction is kept in sync with the
   posted date on the transaction that is the source of the gains.
   See the document 'lots.txt', section 'Cap Gains Actual Implementation' 
   for details.
- Value of Gains Transaction
   The value recorded by the gains transaction is kept in sync with
   the value

*/
